---
title: BlazeHtml 0.1
description: A first release of the BlazeHtml project
tags: haskell, gsoc
---

This is another blogpost about BlazeHtml -- the project I am working on for
Google Summer of Code for [haskell.org]. Today, I am glad to announce we have a
first version of BlazeHtml ready for use. Note that this is a 0.1 release --
so beware of bugs. We have also created [a website for the project].

[haskell.org]: http://haskell.org
[a website for the project]: http://jaspervdj.be/blaze

## Support for HTML 4 Strict and HTML 5

We support HTML 5 as well as HTML 4 Strict. In the feature, we hope to expand
this set to the other (X)HTML variants, and perhaps XML. There is no "default"
HTML specified: it depends entirely on the modules you import. For example. if
you want HTML 4, you import `Text.Blaze.Html4.Strict`, whereas if you want HTML
5, you need to import `Text.Blaze.Html5`.

## Pretty fast

We think that BlazeHtml is pretty fast and have some benchmarks supporting these
claims. There's more information available on the [benchmarks page] about that.

[benchmarks page]: http://jaspervdj.be/blaze/benchmarks.html

## Documentation

Documentation can never be underestimated: it is of vital importance if you want
people to use your library. There is a preliminary [tutorial] available for now,
and two [examples].

[tutorial]: http://jaspervdj.be/blaze/tutorial.html
[examples]: http://github.com/jaspervdj/BlazeHtml/tree/master/doc/examples/

## Outlook

So, after this first release, here is a list of things we will focus on next:

- Expand the implementation so that we can support fast output of `String` and
  `Text` as well as UTF-8 encoded `ByteString`.
- Add more HTML/XHTML variants.
- Examine the possibility to improve our changes to `Data.Binary.Builder` for
  general use in a separate library (`Utf8Builder`, `TextBuilder`, ...).
- Write a BlazeHtml generator translating a Html page to the corresponding
  BlazeHtml haskell code. This greatly simplifies initial imports and importing
  of new snippets.

## Feedback

As always, feedback is more than welcome! This is a community project, after
all. If you're interested, also check out the [blogs] of the other Google Summer
of Code participants for [haskell.org]!

[blogs]: /links.html#google-summer-of-code-2010-students-for-haskell.org:
