---
title: BlazeHtml 0.2
description: Second release of my GSoC project
tags: haskell, gsoc
---

This is another blogpost about [BlazeHtml] -- the project I am working on for
Google Summer of Code for [haskell.org]. We are ready for a 0.2 release, which
should fix all the issues with the 0.1 release.

[BlazeHtml]: http://jaspervdj.be/blaze
[haskell.org]: http://haskell.org

## Internal rewrite

Internally, most of it has been rewritten. The big advantage of our new internal
system is that we can now support different backends, without losing any speed.
We support the following backends for now:

- `Text.Blaze.Renderer.Utf8`: The default, fast UTF-8 renderer which produces a
  lazy `ByteString`.
- `Text.Blaze.Renderer.String`: A renderer which renders the page to a `String`.
  This renderer is optimized as well, but of course, not as fast as the `Utf8`
  renderer.
- `Text.Blaze.Renderer.Pretty`: A variation of the `String` renderer which
  produces a prettified, well-intended page. This is only meant for debugging
  purposes.

## Supported HTML versions

We've expanded the set of supported HTML versions as well. Blaze now supports:

- HTML 5
- HTML 4 Strict
- HTML 4 Transitional
- HTML 4 Frameset

## blaze-from-html

Additionally, I've been working on a tool `blaze-from-html` (which needs to be
separately installed using `cabal install blaze-from-html`) to convert HTML to
blaze code.

    [jasper@alice ~]$ curl -S http://haskell.org/ | blaze-from-html -e | head
    docTypeHtml ! xmlns "http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" ! lang "en" $ do
        H.head $ do
            H.title "Haskell - HaskellWiki"
            meta ! name "KEYWORDS" ! content "Haskell"
            meta ! http_equiv "Content-type" ! content "text/html; charset=utf-8"
            meta ! name "robots" ! content "index,follow"
            link ! rel "shortcut icon" ! href "/favicon.ico"
            link ! rel "copyright" ! href "/haskellwiki/HaskellWiki:Copyrights"
            ...

The `-e` flags ignores some errors, basically because the haskell homepage is
XHTML, and `blaze-from-html` wants to read HTML.

As you can see, the produced code is prettified and indented. If you use
the `-s` (standalone) flag, you will also get all the necessary imports and
definitions, so you can directly compile the produced file.

## Html type

Another big change is that we've changed the type for templates. From now on,
all your templates will be of the type `Html` instead of `Html ()`. We felt this
choice is more sensible -- we're very sorry if this temporarily breaks your
application.

## Feedback

As always, feedback is more than welcome! This is a community project, after
all. If you're interested, also check out the [blogs] of the other Google Summer
of Code participants for [haskell.org]!

[blogs]: $root/links.html#google-summer-of-code-2010-students-for-haskell.org:
