---
title: BlazeHtml 0.4
description: An update for the BlazeHtml project, with some new features
tags: haskell, code
--

I've just uploaded BlazeHtml 0.4 to Hackage. There's some new things in there,
so I thought it would be a good idea to summarize it here.

## Text renderer

A Text renderer was added in the new Text.Blaze.Renderer.Text module. The
interface should look quite familiar to everyone who looked at BlazeHtml before:

~~~~~{.haskell}
renderHtml :: Html -> Text
~~~~~

The produced Text is lazy, built by the Text builder that was recently added. It
isn't as fast as the UTF8 ByteString renderer, but there is still room for some
improvements here.

## Removal of showHtml methods

The showHtml functions were removed -- this breaks backwards compatibility, but:

- these calls can be easily replaced by `string . show`, which is hardly longer;
- the naming scheme for these functions was inconsistent with the other
  functions in `Text.Blaze`;
- we found a good replacement, which will be explained in the next section.

## The ToHtml/ToValue typeclasses

We've added two handy typeclasses at the top of BlazeHtml, in the `Text.Blaze`
module.

~~~~~{.haskell}
class ToHtml a where
    toHtml :: a -> Html
~~~~~

~~~~~{.haskell}
class ToValue a where
    toValue :: a -> AttributeValue
~~~~~

They have all the instances one would expect: the different string types such as
`Text` and lazy `Text`, and some other common types such as numerical values
(`Int`, `Float` ...).

This means that in most cases, showHtml can also be replaced by toHtml. The
advantage of using these functions is that they provide a more unified interface
to the web developer.

## Hexpat renderer

I also added a Hexpat renderer some time ago. You can read more about that
[here]. Like the other renderers, it provides a simple `renderHtml -> Forest`
function (where `Forest` is a forest of Hexpat nodes). However, this package is
maintained in a separate repository since I want a very small dependency set for
the `blaze-html` package.

[here]: http://softwaresimply.blogspot.com/2010/12/heist-gets-blaze-syntax.html

That concludes the small BlazeHtml status update. Feedback is welcome, as
always.
