---
title: 'UGent Courses: A Review'
description: I recently graduated from Ghent University, so time for a review
tags: ugent
---

# Introduction

Last month, I graduated from [Ghent University]. This seems like an excellent
time to review all the courses I took, and I hope this might be useful to future
or current UGent Computer Science students.

[Ghent University]: http://ugent.be/

![After the graduation ceremony](/images/2013-08-10-graduation.jpg)

This is purely my own opinion and I do not represent my classmates. One should
also note that I review the courses as they were at the point that I followed
them, and I know that some of the courses have been revised at this point. I
can't comment on the revisions since I didn't take any courses more than once.

# First year

We only had mandatory courses in our first year.

## Mandatory courses

**Algorithms and Data Structures I**: (*Algoritmen en datastructuren I*): Quite
simply a solid first course on algorithms and data structures.

**Applied Formal Logic I** (*Toegepaste formele logica I*): Some parts about
lambda calculus, and some on simple logic laws. Elementary.

**Calculus I** (*Analyse I*): It was a calculus course. It was quite boring.

**Communication skills** (*Communicatievaardigheden*): This seems to be widely
regarded as a useless course. However, I have given quite a few talks in the
past few years, and I do think this course has definitely improved my skills
when it comes to making slides.

**Computer usage** (*Computergebruik*): This course teaches some UNIX and
command-line basics. The exercises and practical exam focus on esoteric problems
which are hard to solve using the given tools. While this makes it fun,
challenging and interesting, the course comes with a big "Do Not Try This Stuff
For Real"-warning.

**Discrete mathematics** (*Discrete wiskunde*): Quite interesting, I guess. Kind
of hard as well.

**Laws of Intellectual Property** (*Recht van de intellectuele eigendom*): The
only mandatory law course in the Computer Science program. It's well-taught but
the subject remains plain and boring.

**Linear Algebra and Geometry** (*Lineaire algebra en meetkunde*): I feel like
this is a really interesting, vastly underrated course at UGent. The main
problem with this course is that all exercises, and even the exam, could be
solved by copy-pasting previous or example exercises. Hence, no one even
bothered to really study this.

**Programming I** (*Programmeren I*): The lessons are pretty good, but it really
teaches Java instead of "Programming". I guess this course suffers a bit from an
*Everything-Is-An-Object-Even-When-It-Isn't*-symptom. I believe it would be more
useful to start out with simple procedural programming and teach that well, then
introduce Object-Oriented programming later as a natural transition by coupling
datatypes and related procedures.

**Programming II** (*Programmeren II*): This course was basically about two
things: the Swing framework and the corresponding interpretation of
Model-View-Controller. I don't think a lot of interesting materials are taught
here. However, this course came with a project, which yielded really valuable
programming experience.

**Scripting Languages** (*Scriptingtalen*): Basically the continuation of
*Computer usage*. Made us do seemingly impossible stuff with arcane tools (think
XML processing with `sed` and `awk`). This made the course fun but I'm not sure
if it was that useful, since I hardly remember anything about `awk` and only
use simple `sed` commands (as opposed to the stuff we had to pull off during the
exercises -- *whaddup, hold buffer?*).

# Second year

In our second year, we were allowed to choose a single optional course.

## Mandatory courses

**Algorithms and Data Structures II**: (*Algoritmen en datastructuren II*):
Largely a continuation of *Algorithms and Data Structures I*. More algorithms,
more data structures. Not a bad course -- the professor really knows this stuff
and is very enthusiastic, which made the lessons quite fun.

**Applied Formal Logic II** (*Toegepaste formele logica II*): I actually do not
quite remember anything specific that I learned in this course. This course
seems mostly unnecessary.

**Calculus II** (*Analyse II*): See *Calculus I*: same shit, different year.

**Computer Architecture** (*Computerarchitectuur*): This teaches some essential
basics of how a computer works. I feel like this course belongs in the first
year rather than the second year. Very well-taught and the lab sessions are very
cool.

**Databases** (*Databanken*): I think this course should be called "History of
Databases: Where we start out with ancient history and end in the 90s!".

**Software Development I** (*Software-ontwikkeling I*): I already wrote a post
on this course, which can be found
[here](/posts/2010-01-20-software-development-i-impressions.html). The gist of
it is that we were taught some C and C++ in this course. To quote [Ron Swanson]:
"Never half-ass two things: whole-ass one thing".

[Ron Swanson]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ron_Swanson

**Software Development II** (*Software-ontwikkeling II*): In this course, we had
to do a small project with a team. That was really interesting and we learned a
whole bunch from it. In the end, the teaching assistants graded the project
without judging the internal design of the project, which we thought was quite
lame. In addition to this project, there were some lessons and lab sessions.
Both were useless and uninteresting.

**Multimedia** (*Multimedia*): Some important multimedia fundamentals,
supplemented by a collection of mildly interesting trivia on widely used formats
such as [VRML](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VRML). This course didn't really
appeal to me.

**Probability Calculus and Statistics** (*Waarschijnlijkheidsrekenen en
statistiek*): Another fundamental but kind of dull course. Due to lack of time
we didn't properly see statistics, which I think is a bit problematic.

## Optional courses

**Introduction to Bio-informatics** (*Introductie in de bio-informatica*): I
chose this course because I thought it would be challenging and interesting. It
turned about to be only slightly interesting and much less practical than I had
hoped. I vaguely remember searching online databases for property X of protein Y
without even knowing what X or Y was. Hell, I still barely even know what a
protein is. I recommend only taking this course if you have a real interest in
biology.

# Third year

## Mandatory courses

**Algorithms and Data Structures III**: (*Algoritmen en datastructuren III*):
See *Algorithms and Data Structures II*: same professor, different subjects.
Pretty much my only complaint about this course is that the chapter on
distributed algorithms seemed to date from a time in which distributed
algorithms were not actually used. Yep.

**Communication Networks** (*Communicatienetwerken*): This was a pretty useful
one. Some stuff on networks, and commonly used protocols on different layers
such as IP, TCP/UDP, HTTP. The more advanced topics included IPv6, IPSEC and
VPN. The lab sessions were very well set-up and intriguing.

**Cross-Course Project** (*Vakoverschijdend project*): Build a simple webapp. A
pretty nice experience, altough building a such a project over 12 weeks makes
you focus on *Get Stuff Done* rather than *Do Stuff The Right Way*. Makes you
dislike your team because they're all incompetent.

**Data Communication** (*Datacommunicatie*): Definitely deserves a nomination
for all-round worst course in the program. The subjects are dull and they are
taught in a deadening way. Attending the exercise sessions is an utter waste
of time. The exam included solving an massively huge but simple exercise: I
can't remember exactly what it was but I guess it compares to multiplying a
few 10x10 matrices with pen and paper: clearly the best way to check that
one understands matrix multiplication.

**Introduction to Electrical Engineering** (*Introductie tot elektrotechniek*):
This course was pretty hard and I am still undecided on whether this should or
should not be a mandatory course -- most of it seems only related in a very
indirect way. Nonetheless, I kind of enjoyed knowing a bit more about this
stuff, although I forgot most of it soon afterwards.

**Internet Technology** (*Internettechnologie*): Quite simple, completely
useless.

**Formal Languages, Automata, Complexity** (*Formele talen, automaten,
complexiteit*): I thought this was a dull course, but I remember a number of
concepts we saw in this course (e.g. the distinctions between regular and
context free languages, the halting problem) really clearly so I guess it was
not bad after all.

**Operating Systems** (*Besturingssystemen*): Regardless of the name, this
pretty much feels like a continuation of *Computer Architecture*. Some
intriguing low-level stuff is taught here, and the course has great lab
sessions as well.

**Scientific Computing** (*Wetenschappelijk rekenen*): Well-taught and quite
interesting. I barely remember anything from this course though: except the fact
that numerical computing can be hard even when it seems easy. Therefore, one
should just use existing libraries and applications.

## Optional courses

**Economy** (*Economy*): Probably one of the easiest courses at UGent. I was
doing a lot of open-source development and other exciting stuff at this time so
I didn't want to waste too much time with another course. Well, I never attended
any lessons and studied less than two days as exam preparation -- so I think it
deserves the title.

**Programming Languages** (*Programmeertalen*): This course simply boils down to
reading [Concepts, Techniques, and Models of Computer
Programming](http://www.info.ucl.ac.be/~pvr/book.html) and programming a bit in
[Oz]. But hey, it's a really good book, and Oz is a fun language.

[Oz]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oz_%28programming_language%29

# Fourth year

## Mandatory courses

**Advanced Computer Architecture** (*Geavanceerde computerarchitectuur*):
Another nice course on low-level stuff. We had to do some research for this as
well. That was cool, but unfortunately, there were lots of other projects in
this term, so the research projects didn't get the attention they deserved.

**Design of Distributed Software** (*Ontwerp van gedistribueerde software*):
Except for some chapters on [MPI] and a few interesting algorithms, I found the
subjects in this course [extremely boring](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/J2ee) or
[pretty much useless](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Corba).

[MPI]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Message_Passing_Interface

**Design of Multimedia Applications** (*Ontwerp van multimediatoepassingen*):
This course had challenging and interesting projects to work on. I didn't really
like the theoretical classes and found them rather shallow and untechnical.

**Multimedia Networks** (*Multimedianetwerken*): Another course containing a
wide variety of subjects, sometimes related, sometimes not. Teaches you a whole
bunch of facts about backbone networks and routing in these networks -- most of
which I forgot about a week later. Some of the lab sessions were quite cool
though.

**Queuing Theory** (*Wachtlijntheorie*): I can figure out basic queues and I
guess I can look up other models if I ever need to. I'm not sure why we need an
entire course on this subject.

**Software Architecture** (*Softwarearchitectuur*): Spend an entire term writing
documents and making presentations about a product you'll never end up coding.
Earn bonus points for hypothetically earning money and win the game if you
manage to out-bluff the other teams in terms of complicated design patterns and
buzzwords.

**Software Design Project** (*Software-ontwerpproject*): Now you get to actually
implement the product you designed in *Software Architecture*. Only, you'll cut
as many features as you can first, add a whole bunch of others, scratch those
again, redesign it and then still code something else entirely. The end result
might be a total turd but at least you'll have a Test Manager ensuring you that
no tests failed so everything will work as expected, and a shitload of pretty
presentations to convince clients around the world.

**Software Management** (*Softwarebeheer*): This (extremely dull and completely
useless) course has made me realize that [Dilbert] must be based on actual
facts.

[Dilbert]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dilbert

## Optional courses

**Information Security** (*Informatiebeveiliging*): I liked this course. It's
practical and gets technical, while still providing a very good high-level
overview.

**Functional and Logical Programming Languages** (*Functionele en logische
programmeertalen*): Since I'm an avid fan of functional programming languages,
the fact that I enjoyed this course will probably not be a suprise to you. I'll
just add that I liked the teaching style, and the combination of two
paradigms/languages (Prolog and Haskell) which highlighted the strengths and
weaknesses of both.

# Fifth year

## Mandatory courses

**Formal Systems Modelling for Software** (*Formele systeemmodellering voor
software*): A lot of subjects lie in the intersection of the *Applied Formal
Logic I/II* and this course, so there was a lot of repetition of an already
quite dull field. We did get an interesting [ACL2] project which I liked a lot
once I sort of got into it.

[ACL2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ACL2

**Information Management** (*Informatiebeheer*): A variety of subjects: Data
Mining, B-Trees (we already saw that), how filesystems work (what?), Data
Warehousing, mobile databases (what??), storing geographical POIs in a DB
(what???). The practical exam also deserves a nomination for
*Lots-Of-Calculations-Showing-Absolutely-Nothing*, although in this area it
still loses to *Data Communication*.

## Optional courses

**Compilers** (*Compilers*): A good course on compilers which mostly interesting
lab sessions. This course should be mandatory rather than optional in any
Computer Science program.

**Movement and Sports: Now and Later** (*Bewegen en sport: nu en later*): I took
this one mostly because it seemed like fun. It was less fun than I expected, but
still pretty easy (the other reason I chose this course).

**Business Law** (*Ondernemingsrecht*): I don't ever want to study anything like
this again as long as I live. The only thing I remember is that starting a
Business brings with it a awful shitload of legal work in Belgium.

**Internship** (*Stage*): I worked for 3 months in Tokyo, coding Haskell,
with amazing people at an [awesome company](http://www.tsurucapital.com/en/). It
was fantastic.

**Investment Analysis** (*Beleggingsleer*): I chose this course because it
related to my *Internship*. While it gave a pretty good high-level overview, it
wasn't really practical and we skipped some of the most interesting subjects
(futures, options).
