---
title: I do not have a lot of strong opinions
description: An introspective blogpost on my apparent lack of strong views
tags: life
---

I cannot remember many occasions in the past few years where I have vividly and
intensely participated in group discussions. I used to attribute this to my
natural shyness, but in the past year I have come to realise this has not been
the main cause for at least recently: I have clearly become less shy over the
years, whilst at the same time there has been little change in how I participate
in arguments.

My attitude usually shifts between questioning and an *"I guess I understand how
you feel about it"*-kind of agreeing. I think the reason for this is twofold.

The first one is simply that of having a defensive point-of-view: as you express
stronger opinions and make stronger claims, the consequences of being wrong grow
worse as well.

The second one, I think, is more interesting. I hate arguing about subjects of
which I do not *know enough about* -- and the number of subjects I know about is
awfully small.

Hence, my opinions are rarely clear and solid. They are fuzzy and there is lot
of *"I agree that if X then Y, but I don't know much about X so I cannot tell
about Y"*.

![Flashbacks and Cults in various states of wear](/images/2014-01-05-skate-wheels.jpg)

Note that this is mostly unrelated to whether or not the claim is subjective.
For example, I think Abec11 70s Flashbacks are vastly superior skate wheels
compared to Cult Classics. I have reached this conclusion after uncountable
skate sessions on multiple sets of both types of wheels, until they were all
pretty much destroyed to the core. Of course other people are entitled to have
an opinion on this as well, but if I would hear anyone state otherwise, I would
passionately engage in a discussion.

Another example is the great VIM vs. Emacs debate which, after decades, still
inspires many blogposts and articles. I use VIM and I am happy with it, and I
can customize the bits I do not like. However, I would never claim VIM is
superior to Emacs in any way, before at least trying Emacs seriously for half a
year or more. And consequently, I would rather behave in a questioning and
passive way. I prefer learning something more about Emacs over convincing
someone to use VIM simply for the sake of winning the argument.

It goes further than that. I can do a meta-discussion, and state that this
blogpost is probably wrong or at least unjustified since I do not have a lot of
experience with the other side -- making strong claims on a variety of subjects.

Still, it intuitively feels wrong when I hear people who clearly do not know how
nuclear fusion and radiation exactly work make claims and even convince other
people on whether or not we should abolish nuclear energy.

I guess I would not make a very good politician.
