---
title: 'The ZuriHac registration system'
description: 'How and why we wrote our own tools from scratch'
tags: 'haskell'
---

# Introduction

I am one of the main organizers of [ZuriHac], and last year, we wrote our own
registration system for the conference in Haskell.  This blogpost explains why
we decided to go this route, and we go into its design a bit as a case study.  I

I hope that the second part is especially useful to less experienced Haskellers,
since it is a nice example of small but useful standalone application.  In fact,
this was more or less an explicit purpose of the project: I worked on this
together with [Charles Till] to mentor him a bit in day-to-day practical
Haskell.

In theory, it should also be able to reuse this system for other conferences --
not too much of it ZuriHac specific, and it's all open source.

# Why?

Before 2019; ZuriHac registration worked purely based on Google tools and manual
labor:

 -  Google Forms for the registration form
 -  Google Sheets to manage the registrants, waitlist, T-Shirt numbers, ...
 -  Google Groups to contact registrants

Apart from the fact that the manual labor done by yours truly wasn't scaling
above roughly 300 people, there were a number of practical issues with these
tools.  The biggest issue was managing the waiting list and cancellations.

ZuriHac is a free conference, which means that the barrier to signing up for it
is (intentionally) extremely low.  Unfortunately, this will always result in a
significant amount of people who sign up for the event, but do not actually
attend.  We try compensating for that by overbooking and offering cancellations;
but sometimes it turns out to be hard to get people to cancel as well --
especially if it's hard to reach them -- Google Groups is not great for the
purpose we're using it for.

So one of the goals for the new registration system (in addition to reducing
work on our side) was to be able to track participant numbers better.  We wanted
to work a downloadable ticket; or with an explicit confirmation that you're
attending the event.

I looked into a few options (eventbrite, eventlama, and others...) but neither
of them ticked all the boxes: aside from being free (since we have limited
budget), the privacy of our attendees and some sort of JSON or CSV export option
were very important to us.

So, I decided to solve this problem the same the way I usually solve problems:
write some Haskell code.

# How?

The ZuriHac Registration system ([zureg]) is a "serverless" application that
runs on AWS.  It was designed to fit almost entirely in the free tier of AWS;
which is why I e.g. picked DynamoDB over a database that's actually nice to use.
We'll use Brendan Hay's excellent and extensive [amazonka] libraries to talk to
AWS.

The total cost of having this running for a year, including during ZuriHac,
totaled up to around 0.60 Swiss Francs so I would say that worked out well.

There's two big parts to the application: a fat lambda function that provides a
number of different endpoints, and a bunch of command line utilities that talk
to the different services directly.

        Participants  <------------>  API Gateway <----> Lambda

                                                            ^
                                                            |
                                                            |
                                                            |
                                                            v

        CLI Tools     <------------------------>      DynamoDB & SES

However, these are both part of one monolithic codebase which makes it very easy
to share code and ensure all behaviour is consistent -- one big "library" and
multiple lightweight "executables" is how I like to design applications in
Haskell.

## Building and deploying

First, I'd like to go into how the project is build and compiled -- and in a
nutshell, it is not great, but I do think it makes a good cookbook of how to do
things by hand.

The main hurdle is that we'll want to run our Haskell code on Lambda, since this
is much cheaper than using an EC2 instance.

I wrote a bunch of this code before some Haskell-on-Lambda solutions popped up,
so it is all done from scratch -- and it's surprisingly short.  However, when
starting a new project, I would now recommend using one of these frameworks:

 -  [wai-lambda]( https://hackage.haskell.org/package/wai-lambda)
 -  [serverless-haskell](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/serverless-haskell)
 -  [aws-lambda-haskell-runtime](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/aws-lambda-haskell-runtime)

Converting zureg to use of these frameworks is also something I'd like to look
into.  The advantage of doing things from scratch, however, is that it serves
the educational purposes of this blogpost very well!

Our entire serverless framework is currently contained in
[a single 138-line file](https://github.com/zfoh/zureg/blob/master/lib/Zureg/Serverless.hs).

From a bird's eye view, the building/deployment process looks like this:

 1. We define a
    [docker image](https://github.com/zfoh/zureg/blob/master/Dockerfile)
    that's based on Amazon Linux -- this ensures we're using the same operating
    system as Lambda, so our binary will work there.

 2. We compile our code inside a docker container and copy out the resulting
    executable to the host.

 3. We zip this up together with a
    [python script](https://github.com/zfoh/zureg/blob/master/deploy/main.py)
    that just forwards requests to the Haskell process.

 4. We upload this zip to S3 and our
    [cloudformation](https://github.com/zfoh/zureg/blob/master/lib/Zureg/Serverless.hs)
    takes care of setting up the rest of the infrastructure.

# TODO: s/master/38d2374a/g

I think the current build/deploy situation is still pretty manageable since the
application is so small; but porting this to something nicer like Nix is
definitely an option.

## The database

Our data model isn't too complex.  We're using an event sourcing approach: this
means that our source of truth is really an append-only series of events rather
than a traditional row in a database that we update.  These events are stored as
plain JSON, and we can define them in pure Haskell:

    https://github.com/zfoh/zureg/blob/master/lib/Zureg/Model.hs

And then we just have a few handwritten functions in the database module:

    https://github.com/zfoh/zureg/blob/master/lib/Zureg/Database.hs

This gives us a few things for free; most importantly if something goes wrong we
can go in and check what events led the user to get into this invalid state.

This code is backed by the [eventful] and [evenful-dynamodb] libraries, in
addition to some custom queries.

[eventful]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/eventful-core
[eventful-dynamodb]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/eventful-dynamodb

## The lambda

While our admins can interact with the system using the CLI tooling,
registrants interact with the system using the webapp.  The web application is
powered by a fat [^1]
[lambda](https://github.com/zfoh/zureg/blob/master/lib/Zureg/Main/Lambda.hs).

[^1]: In serverless terminology, it seems to common to refer to lambdas that
    deal with more than one specific endpoint as "fat lambdas".  I think this
    distracts from the issue a bit, since it's more important to focus on how
    the code works and is reusable rather than how it is deployed -- but
    I do like the sound of "fat lambda" a lot.

Using this web app, registrants can do a few things:

 -  Register for the conference (powered by a huge web 1.0 form using
    [digestive-functors](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/digestive-functors));
 -  View their ticket (including a QR code generated by
    [qrcode](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/qrcode);
 -  Confirm their registration;
 -  Cancel their registration.

In addition to that, there's a route used for ticket scans -- which we'll talk
about next.

